# Anomaly Detection

## Finding unusual events

Let's look at our second unsupervised learning algorithm. Anomaly detection algorithms look at an unlabeled dataset of normal events and thereby learns to detect or to raise a red flag for if there is an unusual or an anomalous event. 

Let's look at an example. Some of my friends were working on using anomaly detection to detect possible problems with aircraft engines that were being manufactured. When a company makes an aircraft engine, we really want that aircraft engine to be reliable and function well because an aircraft engine failure has very negative consequences. 

So some of my friends were using anomaly detection to check if an aircraft engine after it was manufactured seemed anomalous or if there seemed to be anything wrong with it. Here's the idea, after an aircraft engine rolls off the assembly line, we can compute a number of different features of the aircraft engine. So, say feature x1 measures the heat generated by the engine. 

Feature x2 measures the vibration intensity and so on and so forth for additional features as well. But to simplify the slide a bit, we're going to use just two features x1 and x2 corresponding to the heat and the vibrations of the engine. Now, it turns out that aircraft engine manufacturers don't make that many bad engines. 

And so the easier type of data to collect would be if we have manufactured m aircraft engines to collect the features x1 and x2 about how these m engines behave and probably most of them are just fine that normal engines rather than ones with a defect or flaw in them. And the anomaly detection problem is, after the learning algorithm has seen these m examples of how aircraft engines typically behave in terms of how much heat is generated and how much they vibrate. If a brand new aircraft engine were to roll off the assembly line and it had a new feature vector given by Xtest, we'd like to know does this engine look similar to ones that have been manufactured before? 

So is this probably okay? Or is there something really weird about this engine which might cause this performance to be suspect, meaning that maybe we should inspect it even more carefully before we let it get shipped out and be installed in an airplane and then hopefully nothing will go wrong with it. Here's how an anomaly detection algorithm works. 

Let me plot the examples x1 through xm over here via these crosses where each cross each data point in this plot corresponds to a specific engine with a specific amount of heat and specific amount of vibrations. If this new aircraft engine Xtest rolls off the assembly lin,e and if we were to plot these values of x1 and x2 and if it were here, we say, okay, that looks probably okay. Looks very similar to other aircraft engines. 

Maybe I don't need to worry about this one. But if this new aircraft engine has a heat and vibration signature that is say all the way down here, then this data point down here looks very different than ones we saw up on top. And so we will probably say, boy, this looks like an anomaly. 

This doesn't look like the examples I've seen before, we better inspect this more carefully before we let this engine get installed on an airplane. How can we have an algorithm address this problem? The most common way to carry out anomaly detection is through a technique called density estimation. 

And what that means is, when we're given our training sets of these m examples, the first thing we do is build a model for the probability of x. In other words, the learning algorithm will try to figure out what are the values of the features x1 and x2 that have high probability and what are the values that are less likely or have a lower chance or lower probability of being seen in the data set. In this example that we have here, I think it is quite likely to see examples in that little ellipse in the middle, so that region in the middle would have high probability maybe things in this ellipse have a little bit lower probability. 

Things in this ellipse of this oval have even lower probability and things outside have even lower probability. The details of how we decide from the training set what regions are higher versus lower probability is something we'll see in the next few sections. And having modeled or having learned to model for p of $x$ When we are given the new test example Xtest. 

What we will do is then compute the probability of Xtest. And if it is small or more precisely, if it is less than some small number that we're going to call epsilon, this is a greek alphabet epsilon. So what we should think of as a small number, which means that p of $x$ is very small or in other words, the specific value of $x$ that we saw for a certain user was very unlikely, relative to other usage that we have seen. 

But the p of Xtest is less than some small threshold or some small number epsilon, we will raise a flag to say that this could be an anomaly. So for example, if Xtest was all the way down here, the probability of an example landing all the way out here is actually quite low. And so hopefully p of Xtest for this value of Xtest will be less than epsilon and so we would flag this as an anomaly. 

Whereas in contrast, if p of Xtest is not less than epsilon, if p of Xtest is greater than equal to epsilon, then we will say that it looks okay, this doesn't look like an anomaly. And that response to if we had an example in here say where our model p of $x$ will say that examples near the middle here, they're actually quite high probability. There's a very high chance that the new airplane engine will have features close to these inner ellipses. 

And so p of Xtest will be large for those examples and we'll say it's okay and it's not an anomaly. Anomaly detection is used today in many applications. It is frequently used in fraud detection where for example if we are running a website with many different features. 

If we compute xi to be the features of user i's activities. And examples of features might include, how often does this user login and how many web pages do they visit? How many transactions are they making or how many posts on the discussion forum are they making to what is their typing speed? 

How many characters per second do they seem able to type. With data like this we can then model p of $x$ from data to model what is the typical behavior of a given user. In the common workflow of fraud detection, we wouldn't automatically turn off an account just because it seemed anomalous. 

But instead we may ask the security team to take a closer look or put in some additional security checks such as ask the user to verify their identity with a cell phone number or ask them to pass a capture to prove that they're human and so on. But algorithms like this are routinely used today to try to find unusual or maybe slightly suspicious activity. So we can more carefully screen those accounts to make sure there isn't something fraudulent. 

And this type of fraud detection is used both to find fake accounts and this type of algorithm is also used frequently to try to identify financial fraud such as if there's a very unusual pattern of purchases. Then that may be something well worth a security team taking a more careful look at. Anomaly detection is also frequently used in manufacturing. 

we saw an example on the previous slide with aircraft engine manufacturing. But many manufacturers in multiple continents in many, many factories were routinely use anomaly detection to see if whatever they just manufactured. Anything from an airplane engine to a printed circuit board to a smartphone to a motor, to many, many things to see if we've just manufactured the unit that somehow behaves strangely. 

Because that may indicate that there's something wrong with our airplane engine or printed circuit boards or what have we that might cause we to want to take a more careful look before we ship that object to the customer. Is also used to monitor computers in clusters and in data centers where if X I are the features of a certain machine I such as if the features captured the memory users, the number of disk accesses per second. CPU load features can also be ratios, such as the ratio of CPU load to network traffic. 

Then if ever a specific computer behaves very differently than other computers, it might be worth taking a look at that computer to see if something is wrong with it. Such as if it has had a hard disk failure or network card failure or something's wrong with it or if maybe it has been hacked into. Anomaly detection is one of those algorithms that is very widely used even though we don't seem to hear people talk about it that much. 

I remember the first time I worked on the commercial application of anomaly detection was when I was helping a telco company put in place anomaly detection to see when any one of the cell towers was behaving in an unusual way. Because that probably meant there was something wrong with the cell tower and so they want to get a technician to take so hopefully that helped more people get good cell phone coverage. And I've also used anomaly detection to find fraudulent financial transactions And these days I often use it to help manufacturing companies find anomalous parts that they may have manufactured but should inspect more often. 

So it is a very useful tool to have in our tool chest. And in the next few sections we'll talk about how we can build and get these algorithms to work for yourself. In order to get anonymous detection algorithms to work, we'll need to use a Gaussian distribution to model the data p of x. 

So, let's go on to the next section to talk about Gaussian distributions. 

## Gaussian (normal) distribution

In order to apply anomaly detection, we're going to need to use the Gaussian distribution, which is also called the normal distribution. When we hear me say either Gaussian distribution or normal distribution, they mean exactly the same thing. 

If we've heard the bell-shaped distribution, that also refers to the same thing. But if we haven't heard of the bell-shaped distribution, that's fine too. But let's take a look at what is the Gaussian or the normal distribution. 

Say $x$ is a number, and if $x$ is a random number, sometimes called the random variable, $x$ can take on random values. If the probability of $x$ is given by a Gaussian or normal distribution with mean parameter Mu, and with variance Sigma squared. What that means is that the probability of $x$ looks like a curve that goes like this. 

The center or the middle of the curve is given by the mean Mu, and the standard deviation or the width of this curve is given by that variance parameter Sigma. Technically, Sigma is called the standard deviation and the square of Sigma or Sigma squared is called the variance of the distribution. This curve here shows what is p of $x$ or the probability of x. 

If we've heard of the bell-shaped curve, this is that bell-shaped curve because a lot of classic bells say in towers were shaped like this with the bell clapper hanging down here, and so the shape of this curve is vaguely reminiscent of the shape of the large bells that we will still find in some old buildings today. Better looking than my hand-drawn one. There's a picture of the Liberty Bell. 

Indeed, the Liberty Bell's shape on top is vaguely bell-shaped curve. If we're wondering what does p of $x$ really means? Here's one way to interpret it. 

It means that if we were to get, say, 100 numbers drawn from this probability distribution, and we were to plot a histogram of these 100 numbers drawn from this distribution, we might get a histogram that looks like this. It looks vaguely bell-shaped. What this curve on the left indicates is not if we have just 100 examples or 1,000 or a million or a billion. 

But if we had a practically infinite number of examples, and we were to draw a histogram of this practically infinite number of examples with a very fine histogram bin. Then we end up with essentially this bell-shaped curve here on the left. The formula for p of $x$ is given by this expression; p of $x$ equals 1 over square root 2 Pi. 

Pi here is that 3.14159 or it's about 22 over 7. Ratio of a circle's diameter circumference times Sigma times e to the negative $x$ minus Mu, the mean parameter squared divided by 2 Sigma squared. For any given value of Mu and Sigma, if we were to plot this function as a function of x, we get this type of bell-shaped curve that is centered at Mu, and with the width of this bell-shaped curve being determined by the parameter Sigma. 

Now let's look at a few examples of how changing Mu and Sigma will affect the Gaussian distribution. First, let me set Mu equals 0 and Sigma equals 1. Here's my plot of the Gaussian distribution with mean 0, Mu equals 0, and standard deviation Sigma equals 1. 

we notice that this distribution is centered at zero and that is the standard deviation Sigma is equal to 1. Now, let's reduce the standard deviation Sigma to 0.5. If we plot the Gaussian distribution with Mu equals 0 and Sigma equals 0.5, it now it looks like this. 

Notice that it's still centered at zero because Mu is zero. But it's become a much thinner curve because Sigma is now 0.5. we might recall that Sigma is the standard deviation is 0.5, whereas Sigma squared is also called the variance. 

That's equal to 0.5 squared or 0.25. we may have heard that probabilities always have to sum up to one, so that's why the area under the curve is always equal to one, which is why when the Gaussian distribution becomes skinnier, it has to become taller as well. Let's look at another value of Mu and Sigma. 

Now, we're going to increase Sigma to 2, so the standard deviation is 2 and the variance is 4. This now creates a much wider distribution because Sigma here is now much larger, and because it's now a wider distribution is become shorter as well because the area under the curve is still equals 1. Finally, let's try changing the mean parameter Mu, and I'll leave Sigma equals 0.5. 

In this case, the center of the distribution Mu moves over here to the right. But the width of the distribution is the same as the one on top because the standard deviation is 0.5 in both of these cases on the right. This is how different choices of Mu and Sigma affect the Gaussian distribution. 

When we're applying this to anomaly detection, here's what we have to do. we are given a dataset of m examples, and here $x$ is just a number. Here, are plots of the training sets with 11 examples. 

What we have to do is try to estimate what a good choice is for the mean parameter Mu, as well as for the variance parameter Sigma squared. Given a dataset like this, it would seem that a Gaussian distribution maybe looking like that with a center here and a standard deviation like that. This might be a pretty good fit to the data. 

The way we would compute Mu and Sigma squared mathematically is our estimate for Mu will be just the average of all the training examples. It's 1 over m times sum from i equals 1 through m of the values of our training examples. The value we will use to estimate Sigma squared will be the average of the squared difference between two examples, and that Mu that we just estimated here on the left. 

It turns out that if we implement these two formulas in code with this value for Mu and this value for Sigma squared, then we pretty much get the Gaussian distribution that I hand drew on top. This will give we a choice of Mu and Sigma for a Gaussian distribution so that it looks like the 11 training samples might have been drawn from this Gaussian distribution. If we've taken an advanced statistics class, we may have heard that these formulas for Mu and Sigma squared are technically called the maximum likelihood estimates for Mu and Sigma. 

Some statistics classes will tell we to use the formula 1 over n minus 1 instead of 1 over m. In practice, using 1 over m or 1 over n minus 1 makes very little difference. I always use 1 over m, but just some other properties of dividing by m minus 1 that some statisticians prefer. 

But if we don't understand what they just said, don't worry about it. All we need to know is that if we set Mu according to this formula and Sigma squared according to this formula, we'd get a pretty good estimate of Mu and Sigma and in particular, we get a Gaussian distribution that will be a possible probability distribution in terms of what's the probability distribution that the training examples had come from. we can probably guess what comes next. 

If we were to get an example over here, then p of $x$ is pretty high. Whereas if we were to get an example, we are here, then p of $x$ is pretty low, which is why we would consider this example, okay, not really anomalous, not a lot like the other ones. Whereas an example we are here to be pretty unusual compared to the examples we've seen, and therefore more anomalous because p of x, which is the height of this curve, is much lower over here on the left compared to this point over here, closer to the middle. 

Now, we've done this only for when $x$ is a number, as if we had only a single feature for our anomaly detection problem. For practical anomaly detection applications, we usually have a lot of different features. we've now seen how the Gaussian distribution works. 

If $x$ is a single number, this corresponds to if, say we had just one feature for our anomaly detection problem. But for practical anomaly detection applications, we will have many features, two or three or some even larger number n of features. Let's take what we saw for a single Gaussian and use it to build a more sophisticated anomaly detection algorithm. 

They can handle multiple features. Let's go do that in the next section.

## Anomaly detection algorithm

Now that we've seen how the Gaussian or the normal distribution works for a single number, we're ready to build our anomaly detection algorithm. 

Let's dive in. we have a training set x1 through xm, where here each example $x$ has n features. So, each example $x$ is a vector with n numbers. 

In the case of the airplane engine example, we had two features corresponding to the heat and the vibrations. And so, each of these Xi's would be a two dimensional vector and n would be equal to 2. But for many practical applications n can be much larger and we might do this with dozens or even hundreds of features. 

Given this training set, what we would like to do is to carry out density estimation and all that means is, we will build a model or estimate the probability for p(x). What's the probability of any given feature vector? And our model for p(x) is going to be as follows, $x$ is a feature vector with values x1, x2 and so on down to xn. 

And we're going to model p(x) as the probability of x1, times the probability of x2, times the probability of x3 times the probability of xn, for the n th features in the feature vectors. If we've taken an advanced class in probably in statistics before, we may recognize that this equation corresponds to assuming that the features x1, x2 and so on up to xm are statistically independent. But it turns out this algorithm often works fine even that the features are not actually statistically independent. 

But if we don't understand what I just said, don't worry about it. Understanding statistical independence is not needed to fully complete this class and also, be able to very effectively use anomaly detection algorithm. Now, to fill in this equation a little bit more, we are saying that the probability of all the features of this vector features x, is the product of p(x) 1 and p(x2) and so on up through p(xn). 

And in order to model the probability of x1, say the heat feature in this example we're going to have two parameters, mu 1 and sigma 1 or sigma squared is 1. And what that means is we're going to estimate, the mean of the feature x1 and also the variance of feature x1 and that will be new 1 and sigma 1. To model p(x2) x2 is a totally different feature measuring the vibrations of the airplane engine. 

We're going to have two different parameters, which we're going to write as mu 2, sigma 2 squared. And it turns out this will correspond to the mean or the average of the vibration feature and the variance of the vibration feature and so on. If we have additional features mu 3 sigma 3 squared up through mu n and sigma n squared. 

In case we're wondering why we multiply probabilities, maybe here's 1 example that could build intuition. Suppose for an aircraft engine there's a 1/10 chance that it is really hot, unusually hot and maybe there is a 1 in 20 chance that it vibrates really hard. Then, what is the chance that it runs really hot and vibrates really hard. 

We're saying that the chance of that is 1/10 times 1/20 which is 1/200. So it's really unlikely to get an engine that both run really hot and vibrates really hard. It's the product of these two probabilities A somewhat more compact way to write this equation up here,

is to say that this is equal to, the product from j =1 through n of p(xj). 

Would parameters mu j and sigma squared j. And this symbol here is a lot like the summation symbol except that whereas the summation symbol corresponds to addition, this symbol here corresponds to multiplying these terms over here for j =1 through n. So let's put it all together to see how we can build an anamoly detection system. 

The first step is to choose features xi that we think might be indicative of anomalous examples. Having come up with the features we want to use, we would then fit the parameters mu 1 through mu n and sigma square 1 through sigma squared n, for the n features in our data set. As we might guess, the parameter mu j will be just the average of xj of the feature j of all the examples in our training set. 

And sigma square j will be the average of the square difference between the feature and the value mu j, that we just computed. And by the way, if we have a vectorized implementation, we can also compute mu as the average of the training examples as follows, we're here, $x$ and mu are both vectors. And so this would be the vectorized way of computing mu 1 through mu and all at the same time. 

And by estimating these parameters on our unlabeled training set, we've now computed all the parameters of our model. Finally, when we are given a new example, $x$ test or we're just going to write a new example as $x$ here, what we would do is compute p(x) and see if it's large or small. So p(x) as we saw on the last slide is the product from j = 1 through n of the probability of the individual features. 

So p(x) j with parameters mu j and single square j. And if we substitute in, the formula for this probability, we end up with this expression 1 over root 2 pi sigma j of e to this expression over here. And so xj are the features, this is a j feature of our new example, mu j and sigma j are numbers or parameters we have computed in the previous step. 

And if we compute out this formula, we get some number for p(x). And the final step is to see a p(x) is less than epsilon. And if it is then we flag that it is an anomaly. 

1 intuition behind what this algorithm is doing is that it will tend to flag an example as anomalous if 1 or more of the features are either very large or very small relative to what it has seen in the training set. So for each of the features $x$ j, we're fitting a Gaussian distribution like this. And so if even 1 of the features of the new example was way out here, say, then P f xJ would be very small. 

And if just 1 of the terms in this product is very small, then this overall product, when we multiply together will tend to be very small and does p(x) will be small. And what anomaly detection is doing in this algorithm is a systematic way of quantifying whether or not this new example $x$ has any features that are unusually large or unusually small. Now, let's take a look at what all this actually means on 1 example, Here's the data set with features $x$ 1 and $x$ 2. 

And we notice that the features $x$ 1 take on a much larger range of values than the features $x$ 2. If we were to compute the mean of the Features $x$ 1, we end up with five, which is why we want is equal to 1. And it turns out that for this data said, if we compute sigma 1, it will be equal to about 2. 

And if we were to compute mu to the average of the features on next to the average is three and similarly is variance or standard deviation is much smaller, which is why Sigma 2 is equal to 1. So that corresponds to this Gaussian distribution for $x$ 1 and this Gaussian distribution for $x$ 2. If we were to actually multiply p(x) 1 and p(x) 2, then we end up with this three D surface plot for p(x) where any point, the height of this is the product of p(x) 1 times p(x) 2. 

For the corresponding values of $x$ 1 and $x$ 2. And this signifies that values where p(x) is higher or more likely. So, values near the middle kind of here are more likely. 

Whereas values far out here, values out here are much less likely. I have much lower chance. Now, let me pick two test examples, the first 1 here, we're going to write this $x$ test 1 and the second 1 down here as $x$ test 2. 

And let's see which of these 2 examples the algorithm will flag as anomalous. we're going to pick The Parameter ε to be equal to 0.02. And if we were to compute p(x) test 1, it turns out to be about 0.4 and this is much bigger than epsilon. 

And so the album will say this looks okay, doesn't look like an anomaly. Whereas in contrast, if we were to compute p(x) for this point down here corresponding to $x$ 1 equals about eight and $x$ 2 equals about 0.5. Kind of down here, then p(x) test 2 is 0.0021. 

So this is much smaller than epsilon. And so the album will flag this as a likely anomaly. So, pretty much as we might hope it decides that $x$ test 1 looks pretty normal. 

Whereas excess to which is much further away than anything we see in the training set looks like it could be an anomaly. So we've seen the process of how to build an anomaly detection system. But how do we choose the parameter epsilon? 

And how do we know if our anomaly detection system is working well in the next section, let's dive a little bit more deeply into the process of developing and evaluating the performance of an anomaly detection system. Let's go on to the next section

## Developing and evaluating an anomaly detection system

I'd like to share with we some practical tips for developing an anomaly detection system. One of the key ideas will be that if we can have a way to evaluate a system, even as it's being developed, we'll be able to make decisions and change the system and improve it much more quickly. 

Let's take a look at what that means. When we are developing a learning algorithm, say choosing different features or trying different values of the parameters like epsilon, making decisions about whether or not to change a feature in a certain way or to increase or decrease epsilon or other parameters, making those decisions is much easier if we have a way of evaluating the learning algorithm. This is sometimes called real number evaluation, meaning that if we can quickly change the algorithm in some way, such as change a feature or change a parameter and have a way of computing a number that tells we if the algorithm got better or worse, then it makes it much easier to decide whether or not to stick with that change to the algorithm. 

This is how it's often done in anomaly detection. Which is, even though we've mainly been talking about unlabeled data, we're going to change that assumption a bit and assume that we have some labeled data, including just a small number usually of previously observed anomalies. Maybe after making airplane engines for a few years, we've just seen a few airplane engines that were anomalous, and for examples that we know are anomalous, we're going to associate a label $y$ equals 1 to indicate this anomalous, and for examples that we think are normal, we're going to associate the label $y$ equals 0. 

The training set that the anomaly detection algorithm will learn from is still this unlabeled training set of x1 through xm, and we're going to think of all of these examples as ones that we'll just assume are normal and not anomalous, so $y$ is equal to 0. In practice, we have a few anomalous examples where to slip into this training set, our algorithm will still usually do okay. To evaluate our algorithm, come up with a way for we to have a real number evaluation, it turns out to be very useful if we have a small number of anomalous examples so that we can create a cross validation set, which we're going to denote $x_cv$^1, $y_cv$^1 through $x_cv$^mcv, $y_cv$^mcv. 

This is similar notation as we had seen in the second course of this specialization. As similarly, have a test set of some number of examples where both the cross validation and test sets hopefully includes a few anomalous examples. In other words, the cross validation and test sets will have a few examples of $y$ equals 1, but also a lot of examples where $y$ is equal to 0. 

Again, in practice, anomaly detection algorithm will work okay if there are some examples that are actually anomalous, but there were accidentally labeled with $y$ equals 0. Let's illustrate this with the aircraft engine example. Let's say we have been manufacturing aircraft engines for years and so we've collected data from 10,000 good or normal engines, but over the years we had also collected data from 20 flawed or anomalous engines. 

Usually the number of anomalous engines, that is $y$ equals 1, will be much smaller. It will not be a typical to apply this type of algorithm with anywhere from, say, 2-50 known anomalies. We're going to take this dataset and break it up into a training set, a cross validation set, and the test set. 

Here's one example. we're going to put 6,000 good engines into the training set. Again, if there are couple of anomalous engines that got slipped into this set is actually okay, I wouldn't worry too much about that. 

Then let's put 2,000 good engines and 10 of the known anomalies into the cross-validation set, and a separate 2,000 good and 10 anomalous engines into the test set. What we can do then is train the algorithm on the training set, fit the Gaussian distributions to these 6,000 examples and then on the cross-validation set, we can see how many of the anomalous engines it correctly flags. For example, we could use the cross validation set to tune the parameter epsilon and set it higher or lower depending on whether the algorithm seems to be reliably detecting these 10 anomalies without taking too many of these 2,000 good engines and flagging them as anomalies. 

After we have tuned the parameter epsilon and maybe also added or subtracted or tuned to features $X_J$ we can then take the algorithm and evaluate it on our test set to see how many of these 10 anomalous engines it finds, as well as how many mistakes it makes by flagging the good engines as anomalous ones. Notice that this is still primarily an unsupervised learning algorithm because the training sets really has no labels or they all have labels that we're assuming to be $y$ equals 0 and so we learned from the training set by fitting the Gaussian distributions as we saw in the previous section. But it turns out if we're building a practical anomaly detection system, having a small number of anomalies to use to evaluate the algorithm that our cross validation and test sets is very helpful for tuning the algorithm. 

Because the number of flawed engines is so small there's one other alternative that I often see people use for anomaly detection, which is to not use a test set, like to have just a training set and a cross-validation set. In this example, we will set train on 6,000 good engines, but take the remainder of the data, the 4,000 remaining good engines as well as all the anomalies, and put them in the cross validation set. we would then tune the parameters Epsilon and add or subtract features $x_j$ to try to get it to do as well as possible as evaluated on the cross validation set. 

If we have very few flawed engines, so if we had only two flawed engines, then this really makes sense to put all of that in the cross validation set. we just don't have enough data to create a totally separate test set that is distinct from our cross-validation set. The downside of this alternative here is that after we've tuned our algorithm, we don't have a fair way to tell how well this will actually do on future examples because we don't have the test set. 

But when our dataset is small, especially when the number of anomalies we have, our dataset is small, this might be the best alternative we have. I see this done quite often as well when we just don't have enough data to create a separate test set. If this is the case, just be aware that there's a higher risk that we will have over-fit some of our decisions around Epsilon and choice of features and so on to the cross-validation set and so its performance on real data in the future may not be as good as we were expecting. 

Now, let's take a closer look at how to actually evaluate the algorithm on our cross-validation sets or on the test set. Here's what we'd do. we would first fit the model p of $x$ on the training set. 

This was a 6,000 examples of goods engines. Then on any cross validation or test example x, we would compute p of $x$ and we will predict $y$ equals 1. That is anomalous if p of $x$ is less than Epsilon and we predict $y$ is 0, if p of $x$ is greater than or equal to Epsilon. 

Based on this, we can now look at how accurately this algorithm's predictions on the cross validation or test set matches the labels, $y$ we have in the cross validation or the test sets. In the third week of the second course, we had had a couple of optional sections on how to handle highly skewed data distributions where the number of positive examples, $y$ equals 1, can be much smaller than the number of negative examples where $y$ equals 0. This is the case as well for many anomaly detection in the applications where the number of anomalies in our cross-validation set is much smaller. 

In our previous example, we had maybe 10 positive examples and 2,000 negative examples because we had 10 anomalies and 2,000 normal examples. If we saw those optional sections, we may recall that we saw it can be useful to compute things like the true positive, false positive, false negative, and true negative rates. Also compute precision recall or $F_1$ score and that these are alternative metrics and classification accuracy that could work better when our data distribution is very skewed. 

If we saw that section, we might consider applying those types of evaluation metrics as well to tell how well our learning algorithm is doing at finding that small handful of anomalies or positive examples amidst this much larger set of negative examples of normal plane engines. If we didn't watch that section, don't worry about it. It's okay. 

The intuition I hope we get is to use the cross-validation set to just look at how many anomalies is finding and also how many normal engines is incorrectly flagging as an anomaly. Then to just use that to try to choose a good choice for the parameter Epsilon. we find that the practical process of building an anomaly detection system is much easier if we actually have just a small number of labeled examples of known anomalies. 

Now, this does raise the question, if we have a few labeled examples, since we'll still be using an unsupervised learning algorithm, why not take those labeled examples and use a supervised learning algorithm instead? In the next section, let's take a look at a comparison between anomaly detection and supervised learning and when we might prefer one over the other. Let's go on to the next section. 

## Anomaly detection vs. supervised learning

When we have a few positive examples with $y$ = 1 and a large number of negative examples say $y$ = 0? When should we use anomaly detection and when should we use supervised learning? 

The decision is actually quite subtle in some applications. So let me share with we some thoughts and some suggestions for how to pick between these two types of algorithms. And anomaly detection algorithm will typically be the more appropriate choice when we have a very small number of positive examples, 0-20 positive examples is not uncommon. 

And a relatively large number of negative examples with which to try to build a model for p of x. When we recall that the parameters for p of $x$ are learned only from the negative examples and this much smaller. So the positive examples is only used in our cross validation set and test set for parameter tuning and for evaluation. 

In contrast, if we have a larger number of positive and negative examples, then supervised learning might be more applicable. Now, even if we have only 20 positive training examples, it might be okay to apply a supervised learning algorithm. But it turns out that the way anomaly detection looks at the data set versus the way supervised learning looks at the data set are quite different. 

Here is the main difference, which is that if we think there are many different types of anomalies or many different types of positive examples. Then anomaly detection might be more appropriate when there are many different ways for an aircraft engine to go wrong. And if tomorrow there may be a brand new way for an aircraft engine to have something wrong with it. 

Then our 20 say positive examples may not cover all of the ways that an aircraft engine could go wrong. That makes it hard for any algorithm to learn from the small set of positive examples what the anomalies, what the positive examples look like. And future anomalies may look nothing like any of the anomalous examples we've seen so far. 

If we believe this to be true for our problem, then I would gravitate to using an anomaly detection algorithm. Because what anomaly detection does is it looks at the normal examples that is the $y$ = 0 negative examples and just try to model what they look like. And anything that deviates a lot from normal It flags as an anomaly. 

Including if there's a brand new way for an aircraft engine to fail that had never been seen before in our data set. In contrast, supervised learning has a different way of looking at the problem. When we're applying supervised learning ideally we would hope to have enough positive examples for the average to get a sense of what the positive examples are like. 

And with supervised learning, we tend to assume that the future positive examples are likely to be similar to the ones in the training set. So let me illustrate this with one example, if we are using a system to find, say financial fraud. There are many different ways unfortunately that some individuals are trying to commit financial fraud. 

And unfortunately there are new types of financial fraud attempts every few months or every year. And what that means is that because they keep on popping up completely new. And unique forms of financial fraud anomaly detection is often used to just look for anything that's different, then transactions we've seen in the past. 

In contrast, if we look at the problem of email spam detection, well, there are many different types of spam email, but even over many years. Spam emails keep on trying to sell similar things or get we to go to similar websites and so on. Spam email that we will get in the next few days is much more likely to be similar to spam emails that we have seen in the past. 

So that's why supervised learning works well for spam because it's trying to detect more of the types of spam emails that we have probably seen in the past in our training set. Whereas if we're trying to detect brand new types of fraud that have never been seen before, then anomaly detection maybe more applicable. Let's go through a few more examples. 

We have already seen fraud detection being one use case of anomaly detection. Although supervised learning is used to find previously observed forms of fraud. And we've seen email spam classification typically being address using supervised learning. 

we've also seen the example of manufacturing where we may want to find new previously unseen defects. Such as if there are brand new ways for an aircraft engine to fail in the future that we still want to detect. Even if we don't have any positive example like that in our training set. 

It turns out that the manufacturing supervised learning is also used to find defects. The more for finding known and previously seen defects. For example, if we are a smartphone maker, we're making cell phones. 

And we know that occasionally our machine for making the case of the smartphone will accidentally scratch the cover. So scratches are a common defect on smartphones and so we can get enough training examples of scratched smartphones responding to label $y$ =1. And just train the system to decide if a new smartphone that we just manufactured has any scratches in it. 

And the difference is if we just see scratched smartphones over and over and we want to check if our phones are scratched, then supervised learning works well. Whereas if we suspect that they're going to be brand new ways for something to go wrong in the future, then anomaly detection will work well. Some other examples we've heard me talk about monitoring machines in the data center, especially the machine's been hacked. 

It can behave differently in a brand new way unlike any previous way in his behavior. So that would feel more like an anomaly detection application. In fact, one theme is that many security related applications because hackers are often finding brand new ways to hack into systems. 

Many security related applications will use anomaly detection. Whereas returning to supervised learning, if we want to learn to predict the weather well, there's only a handful types of weather that we typically see. Is it sunny, rainy, is it going to snow? 

And so because we see the same output labels over and over, weather prediction would tend to be a supervised learning task. Or if we want to use the symptoms of the patient to see if the patient has a specific disease that we've seen before. Then that would also tend to be a supervised learning application. 

So I hope that gives we a framework for deciding when we have a small set of positive examples as well as maybe a large set of negative examples. Whether to use anomaly detection or supervised learning. Anomaly detection tries to find brand new positive examples that may be unlike anything we've seen before. 

Where supervised learning looks at our positive examples and tries to decide if a future example is similar to the positive examples that we've already seen. Now, it turns out that when building an anomaly detection algorithm, the choice of features is very important and when building anomaly detection systems. I often spend a bit of time trying to tune the features I use for the system in the next section. 

Let me share some practical tips on how to tune the features we feed to anomaly detection algorithm.

## Choosing what features to use

When building an anomaly detection algorithm, I found that choosing a good choice of features turns out to be really important. In supervised learning, if we don't have the features quite right, or if we have a few extra features that are not relevant to the problem, that often turns out to be okay. 

Because the algorithm has to supervised signal that is enough labels why for the algorithm to figure out what features ignore, or how to re scale feature and to take the best advantage of the features we do give it. But for anomaly detection which runs, or learns just from unlabeled data, is harder for the algorithm to figure out what features to ignore. So I found that carefully choosing the features, is even more important for anomaly detection, than for supervised learning approaches. 

Let's take a look at this section as some practical tips, for how to tune the features for anomaly detection, to try to get we the best possible performance. One step that can help our anomaly detection algorithm, is to try to make sure the features we give it are more or less Gaussian. And if our features are not Gaussian, sometimes we can change it to make it a little bit more Gaussian. 

Let me show we what I mean. If we have a feature X, I will often plot a histogram of the feature which we can do using the python command PLT. Though we see this in the practice lab as well, in order to look at the histogram of the data. 

This distribution here looks pretty Gaussian. So this would be a good candidate feature. If we think this is a feature that helps distinguish between anomalies and normal examples. 

But quite often when we plot a histogram of our features, we may find that the feature has a distribution like this. This does not at all look like that symmetric bell shaped curve. When that is the case, I would consider if we can take this feature X, and transform it in order to make a more Gaussian. 

For example, maybe if we were to compute the log of X and plot a histogram of log of X, look like this, and this looks much more Gaussian. And so if this feature was feature X one, then instead of using the original feature X one which looks like this on the left, we might instead replace that feature with log of X one, to get this distribution over here. Because when X one is made more Gaussian. 

When anomaly detection models P of X one using a Gaussian distribution like that, is more likely to be a good fit to the data. Other than the log function, other things we might do is, given a different feature X two, we may replace it with X two, log of X two plus one. This would be a different way of transforming X two. 

And more generally, log of X two plus C, would be one example of a formula we can use, to change X to try to make it more Gaussian. Or for a different feature, we might try taking the square root or really the square would have executed this X lead to the power of one half,and we may change that exponentially term. So for a different feature X four, we might use X four to the power of one third, for example. 

So when we're building an anomaly detection system, I'll sometimes take a look at my features, and if I see any highly non Gaussian by plotting histogram, I might choose transformations like these or others, In order to try to make it more Gaussian. It turns out a larger value of C, will end up transforming this distribution less. But in practice I just try a bunch of different values of C, and then try to take a look to pick one that looks better in terms of making the distribution more Gaussian. 

Now, let me illustrate how I actually do this and that we put a notebook. So this is what the process of exploring different transformations in the features might look like. When we have a feature X, we can plot a histogram of it as follows. 

It actually looks like there's a pretty cause histogram. Let me increase the number of bins in my history gram to 50. So bins equals 50 there. 

That's what histogram bins. And by the way, if we want to change the color, we can also do so as follows. And if we want to try a different transformation, we can try for example to plot X square root of X. 

So X to the power of 0.5 with again 50 histogram bins, in which case it might look like this. And this actually looks somewhat more Gaussian. But not perfectly, and let's try a different parameter. 

So let me try to the power of 4.25. Maybe I just a little bit too far. It's the old 0.4 that looks pretty Gaussian. 

So one thing we could do is replace X with excellent power of 0.4. And so we would set X to be equal to X to the power of 0.4. And just use the value of X in our training process instead. 

Or let me show we another transformation. Here, we're going to try taking the log of X. So log of X spotted with 50 bins, we're going to use the numpy log function as follows. 

And it turns out we get an error, because it turns out that excellent. This example has some values that are equal to zero, and we'll log of zero is negative infinity is not defined. So common trick is to add just a very tiny number there. 

So exports 0.001, becomes non negative. And so we get the histogram that looks like this. But if we want the distribution to look more Gaussian, we can also play around with this parameter, to try to see if there's a value of that. 

Cause user data to look more symmetric and maybe look more Gaussian as follows. And just as we're doing right now in real time, we can see that, we can very quickly change these parameters and plot the histogram. In order to try to take a look and try to get something a bit more Gaussian, than was the original data next that we saw in this histogram up above. 

If we read the machine learning literature, there are some ways to automatically measure how close these distributions are to Gaussian. But I found it in practice, it doesn't make a big difference, if we just try a few values and pick something that looks right to we, that will work well for all practical purposes. So, by trying things out in Jupiter notebook, we can try to pick a transformation that makes our data more Gaussian. 

And just as a reminder, whatever transformation we apply to the training set, please remember to apply the same transformation to our cross validation and test set data as well. Other than making sure that our data is approximately Gaussian, after we've trained our anomaly detection algorithm, if it doesn't work that well on our cross validation set, we can also carry out an error analysis process for anomaly detection. In other words, we can try to look at where the algorithm is not yet doing well whereas making errors, and then use that to try to come up with improvements. 

So as a reminder, what we want is for P of X to be large. For normal examples X, so greater than equal to epsilon, and p f X to be small or less than epsilon, for the anomalous examples X. When we've learned the model P of X from our unlabeled data, the most common problem that we may run into is that, P of X is comparable in value say is, large for both normal and for anomalous examples. 

As a concrete example, if this is our data set, we might fit that Gaussian into it. And if we have an example in our cross validation set or test set, that is over here, that is anomalous, then this has a pretty high probability. And in fact, it looks quite similar to the other examples in our training set. 

And so, even though this is an anomaly, P of X is actually pretty large. And so the algorithm will fail to flag this particular example as an anomaly. In that case, what I would normally do is, try to look at that example and try to figure out what is it that made me think is an anomaly, even if this feature X one took on values similar to other training examples. 

And if I can identify some new feature say X two, that helps distinguish this example from the normal examples. Then adding that feature, can help improve the performance of the algorithm. Here's a picture showing what I mean. 

If I can come up with a new feature X two, say, we're trying to detect fraudulent behavior, and if X one is the number of transactions they make, maybe this user looks like they're making some of the transactions as everyone else. But if I discover that this user has some insanely fast typing speed, and if I were to add a new feature X two, that is the typing speed of this user. And if it turns out that when I plot this data using the old feature X one and this new feature X two, causes X two to stand out over here. 

Then it becomes much easier for the anomaly detection algorithm to recognize an X two is an anomalous user. Because when we have this new feature X two, the learning algorithm may fit a Gaussian distribution that assigns high probability to points in this region, a bit lower in this region, and a bit lower in this region. And so this example, because of the very anomalous value of X two, becomes easier to detect as an anomaly. 

So just to summarize the development process will often go through is, to train the model and then to see what anomalies in the cross validation set the algorithm is failing to detect. And then to look at those examples to see if that can inspire the creation of new features that would allow the algorithm to spot. That example takes on unusually large or unusually small values on the new features, so that we can now successfully flag those examples as anomalies. 

Just as one more example, let's say we're building an anomaly detection system to monitor computers in the data center. To try to figure out if a computer may be behaving strangely and deserves a closer look, maybe because of a hardware failure, or because it's been hacked into or something. So what we'd like to do is, to choose features that might take on unusually large or small values in the event of an anomaly. 

we might start off with features like X one is the memory use, X two is the number of disk accesses per second, then the CPU load, and the volume of network traffic. And if we train the algorithm, we may find that it detects some anomalies but fails to detect some other anomalies. In that case, it's not unusual to create new features by combining old features. 

So, for example, if we find that there's a computer that is behaving very strangely, but neither is CPU load nor network traffic is that unusual. But what is unusual is, it has a really high CPU load, while having a very low network traffic volume. If we're running the data center that streams sections, then computers may have high CPU load and high network traffic, or low CPU load and no network traffic. 

But what's unusual about this one machine is a very high CPU load, despite a very low traffic volume. In that case, we might create a new feature X five, which is a ratio of CPU load to network traffic. And this new feature with hope, the anomaly detection algorithm flagged future examples like the specific machine we may be seeing as anomalous. 

Or we can also consider other features like the square of the CPU load, divided by the network traffic volume. And we can play around with different choices of these features. In order to try to get it so that P of X is still large for the normal examples but it becomes small in the anomalies in our cross validation set. 

So that's it. Thanks for sticking with me to the end of this week. I hope we enjoy hearing about both clustering algorithms and anomaly detection algorithms. 

And that we also enjoy playing with these ideas in the practice labs. Next week, we'll go on to talk about recommender systems. When we go to a website and recommends products, or movies, or other things to we. 

How does that algorithm actually work? This is one of the most commercially important algorithms in machine learning that gets talked about surprisingly little but next week we'll take a look at how these algorithms work so that we understand the next time we go to the website and then recommend something to we. Maybe how that came about. 

As was we'll be able to build other algorithms like that for yourself as well. So have fun with the labs and they look forward to seeing we next week.